Ot that my name receives a brand;
     And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
     To what it works in, like the dyer's hand."

We must bear in mind this continual writhing under the prejudice
against his calling and his art, and this indignation at the injustice
of the attitude adopted towards them by a great part of the middle
classes, if we would understand the high pressure of Shakespeare's
feelings towards the noble youth who had approached him full of the
art-loving traditions of the aristocracy, and the burning enthusiasm
of the young for intellectual superiority. William Herbert, with his
beauty and his personal charm, must have come to him like a very angel
of light, a messenger from a higher world than that in which his lot
was cast. He was a living witness to the fact that Shakespeare was not
condemned to seek the applause of the multitude alone, but could win
the favour of the noblest in the land, and was not excluded from a deep
and almost passionate friendship which placed him on an equal footing
with the bearer of an ancient name. Pembroke's great beauty no doubt
made a deep impression upon the beauty-lover in Shakespeare's soul.
It is very probable, too, that the young aristocrat, according to the
fashion of the times, made the poet his debtor for solider benefactions
than mere friendship; and Shakespeare must thus have felt doubly
painful the situation in which he was placed by the intrigue between
his mistress and his friend.[ 7 ].

In any case, the affection with which Pembroke inspired
Shakespeare--the passionate attachment, leading even to jealousy of
other poets admired by the young nobleman--had not only a vividness,
but an erotic fervour such as we never find in our century manifested
between man and man. Note such an expression as this in Sonnet cx.:--

    "Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
     Even to thy pure and most most loving breast."

This exactly corresponds to Michael Angelo's recently-quoted desire to
"clasp in his yearning arms his heart's loved lord." Or observe such a
line as this in Sonnet lxxv.:--

    "So are you to my thoughts as food to life."

We have here an exact counterpart to the following expressions in a
letter from Michael Angelo to Cavalieri, dated July 1533 : "I would far
rather forget the food on which I live, which wretchedly sustains the
body alone, than your name, which sustains both body and soul, filling
both with such happiness that I can feel neither care nor fear of death
while I have it in my memory."[ 8 ]

The passionate fervour of this friendship on the Platonic model is
accompanied in Shakespeare, as in Michael Angelo, by a submissiveness
on the part of the elder friend towards the younger, which, in these
two supreme geniuses, affects the modern reader painfully. Each had put
off every shred of pride in relation to his idolised young friend. How
strange it seems to find Shakespeare calling himself young Herbert's
"slave," and assuring him that his time, more precious than that of
any other man then living, is of no value, so that his friend may let
him wait or summon him to his side as his caprice and fancy dictate.
In Sonnet lviii. he speaks of "that God who made me first your slave."
Sonnet lvii. runs thus:--

    "Being _your slave_, what should I do but tend
     Upon the hours and times of your desire?
     I have no precious time at all to spend,
     Nor services to do, till you require.
     Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
     Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
     Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
     When you have bid your servant once adieu;
     Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
     Where you may be, or your affairs suppose;
     But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought,
     Save, where you are how happy you make those."

Just as Michael Angelo spoke to Cavalieri of his works as though
they were scarcely worth his friend's notice, so does Shakespeare
sometimes speak of his verses. In Sonnet xxxii. he begs his friends to
"re-survey" them when he is dead:--

    "And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
     Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
     Exceeded by the height of happier men."

This humility becomes quite despicable when a breach is threatened
between the friends. Shakespeare then repeatedly promises so to blacken
himself that his friend shall reap, not shame, but honour, from his
faithlessness. In Sonnet lxxxviii.:--

    "With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
     Upon thy part I can set down a story
     Of faults concealed wherein I am attainted,
     That thou, in losing me, shalt win much glory."

Sonnet lxxxix. is still more strongly worded:--

    "Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
     To set a form upon desired change,
     As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
     I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
     Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
     Thy sweet-beloved name no more shall dwell,
     Lest I (too much profane) should do it wrong,
     And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
        For thee, against myself I'll vow debate,
        For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate."

We are positively surprised when, in a single passage, in Sonnet lxii.,
we come upon a forcible expression of self-love; but it does not extend
beyond the first half of the Sonnet; in the second half this self-love
is already regarded as a sin, and Shakespeare humbly effaces himself
before his friend. All the more gladly does the reader welcome the few
Sonnets (lv. and lxxxi.) in which the poet confidently predicts the
immortality of these his utterances. It is true that Shakespeare is
here greatly influenced by antiquity and by the fashion of his age;
and it is simply as records of his friend's beauty and amiability that
his verses are to be preserved through all ages to come. But no poet
without a sound and vigorous self-confidence could have written either
these lines in Sonnet lv.:--